and a member of the Special Forces. He has an
opening statement he would like to make about what
he will answer and what he won't answer. John?
Okay, one of the conditions for me doing this
interview is that I don't have to engage in any
conversation or discussion about any particular
combat experiences that I had in Vietnam, but I'm
perfectly willing to discuss anything else.
Okay.
How's that? Does that make sense? It's fine. Okay.
I guess the first thing I need to know is when did you
go into the military? I went in the Army in 1966,
right after I got out of high school. I enlisted in
the Army in, I guess, June of 1966 under a kind of a
delayed enlistment program, and I went in in
September of 1966. Why did you enlist? I didn't
have very many options, I guess. That's one reason
why I enlisted was because I didn't do very well in
high school. My family didn't have a lot of money,
so they couldn't send me to college. And I had the
idea that if I went into the Army, you know, I could
get the veterans' benefits, and then maybe
somehow by proving myself, you know, I could get
into college. Another reason was simply just the
idea of going in the Army sort of fascinated me. I
just sort of wondered what it would be like. When I
enlisted initially,
I enlisted for three years, and I didn't know
really what the Army was all about. I just knew I
wanted to jump out of airplanes. So I enlisted in
the Army, what they call airborne unassigned,
which meant like a dummy. I hadn't picked a job that
I was going to do in the Army. The recruiter never
told me that you're supposed to have a job. I
thought I was just going to, you know, get up in the
morning and jump out of airplanes. And I didn't
find out until after basic training, when they
assigned me to military police training, that you
had to have a job, you know, in the Army. When you
joined, it was like June 1966 in Maricopa. Yeah.
was starting to really become aware of Vietnam and
where it was. What was your feeling towards
America's involvement in Vietnam at the time?
Well, I had a pretty clear idea that I thought that
it was a legitimate involvement that, I guess, the
duly constituted government of South Vietnam was
being undermined, I guess, by revolutionaries
and I guess insurgents from the North, and that
they had a legitimate right to call upon powers
that had similar ideas, I guess democratic
principles, to come to their assistance and to
keep them from being denied what at that time I
considered to be their rightful and and
justifiable
political system. So I saw it as legitimate. Our
involvement specifically in Vietnam is
legitimate and just. And I continue, as a matter of
fact, to hold that idea to this very day. Back to
your initial joining of the military. You joined
in, you said, June of 66. Right. What was it like for
a high school kid, fresh out of wherever, to just
join the military and know that, in all
likelihood, he was going to get sent to fight?
Well, to tell you the truth, I didn't. I never had
the idea of, in all likelihood, I was going to be
sent to fight.
That's just sort of an overall, kind of an
unfocused, impressionistic idea. you know,
going in the military. Because again, I came from a
fairly, I don't want to say disadvantaged
background, but for guys in my social status, I
guess, going into the Army was a typical thing
that, you know, high school counselors for years
and years had advised to people like myself and
other, and my friends and things. So it was really
like a lot of the wealthier kids or the upper class
kids, it was expected that they would go on to
college. it was more or less expected, you know,
that the kids that didn't come from a wealthy
background or hadn't majored in courses that
would lead to a college education would either
take some sort of a job or go into the military. So it
was kind of like, it was almost sort of like I was
just following a pattern that most people in my
group followed. So it wasn't sort of like I, you
know, I sat down and I consciously said, I'm going
to go in the Army, you know, and I'm going to find
out. It was just sort of like it was one of the
options that I had open to myself, and my, you know,
my uncles had done it, you know, and older kids in
the neighborhood had done it, and they'd come back
with their uniforms on and all that kind of stuff.
So it was just sort of an expected or a potential or a
historical option that kids from my part of the
country and my, I guess, social and economic
status took for themselves. You grew up in New
Jersey? Yeah, right near New York, about 12 miles
from New York City. Beautiful place. Sounds like
it was. When you first joined, where were you sent?
I was sent to Fort Dix, New Jersey, for basic
training. First I went to Newark, New Jersey,
where they swore me in, you know, and uphold the
Constitution and stuff like that. But I remember
the first thing that happened to me. After I was
sworn into the Army, some guy started yelling at
me. And I had to clean up. Clean up your own. Clean up
the place where we had all been sworn in. The first
thing they did was hand me a broom and said, clean up
this place, private. I said, well, geez, I guess
this is, I'm in the Army now. How did you get
involved with the Special Forces? Well, like I
said, I enlisted in the Army airborne on a sign. All
that I knew is I wanted to jump out of airplanes. I
saw these pictures of guys coming out of
airplanes. I said, gee, that's hot stuff. So
anyway, they assigned me to military police. And
there was no way in the world, you know, a kid
growing up in the streets of New Jersey, the last
thing you want to be is a cop, right? But I think they
figure, you know, that if you've been on the edge of
crime all your life, you know, that you have some
insight, you know, into the criminal mind. And
plus I was big, you know, like six foot two or three
and big, you know, and I liked all of the things. I
think I was a little bit more intelligent than your
average guy, but I liked the same kind of things
that your average, I liked the outdoors, you know,
and all that sort of stuff. But if you weren't real
bright and you liked the outdoors and you liked to
hunt and all that sort of stuff, they put you in the
infantry. But if you're fairly smart, you know,
and you like the outdoors and you like to hunt and
all that stuff, they put you in the military
police. But I didn't want to be in the military
police. So after I finished basic training, I went
to military police training in Fort Gordon,
Georgia. And somewhere in As I was going through
the training and I'm marching around going,
M-I-L-I-T-A-R-Y-P-O-L-I-C-E,
I'm going, I don't want to be this. I don't want to
direct traffic or whatever you do. And I had this
friend, this crazy friend that I met there who was
going to go to jump school too. And one day he said,
hey, there's this thing called special forces
that that you can volunteer for and you can get out
of the military police. And I had kind of a vague
idea, I think, of what it was all about, but I didn't
really have that clear of an idea. He said, it's a
lot of fun. You still get to jump out of airplanes.
You get to do all kinds of hiking around in the woods
and all that sort of stuff. So me and two other guys
one day went and took this test from a special
forces recruiter. Or somebody, I'm not sure, I
can't actually remember whether he was in Special
Forces or not, but we took this test where we had to,
oh, they gave us these hypothetical scenarios and
you had to tell them what you'd do in those
situations. One is if you got captured behind
enemy lines and you had, you know, they gave you
alternative ways of escaping, you know, which one
would you choose, I guess. And then they had
another one that had to do with reconnaissance,
where they'd show you a picture, and then you'd
have to look from a point of view. They'd give you
points of view pictures, and you had to decide from
what point of view that picture was taken. And I
think they had something on foreign language, and
then another thing that had to do with flying
helicopters. I have no idea what that had to do with
anything. But anyway, that's sort of how I came to
volunteer.
kind of an alternative to being in what I consider
to be sort of a ridiculous job, you know, being a
cop. Once you got into them, you didn't stay at Fort
Dix, I'm sure. No, see, I went from Fort Dix, like I
said, to Fort Gordon for military police
training. Then I went from Fort Gordon to jump
school at Fort Benning. And I didn't find out until
I finished jump school at Fort Benning whether I
was was accepted to go into Special Forces
training. And it was the last day of jump school
after we'd done all our jumping and had our wings
and all that stuff. They gather everybody in a big
crowd. And this sergeant stood up on a box and
started reading off where everybody was going.
And most of the guys were going to the 173rd
Airborne in Vietnam right at that point. And I kept
waiting for him to call my name. And then I called
off about, I guess, 10 or 20 names. and said, oh, you
were going to Fort Bragg, North Carolina for
Special Forces training. And I thought, oh my God,
you know, here we go. So I went from Fort Bending,
Georgia to Fort Bragg, North Carolina for Special
Forces training. Now, my dad was also in the
Special Forces, and he was stationed in Fort
Bragg. Was Fort Bragg more or less the
headquarters for the Special Forces training?
Special Forces training, and there were two
Special Forces groups there, the Seventh Special
Forces, I can't even remember, the Seventh and
I don't know, the Third, I think, Third Special
Forces. And then they had what they called Special
Forces Training Group, which was, Special Forces
was situated on what they called Smoke Bomb Hill at
Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and we were down the
road from the 82nd Airborne. which they called the
animals or something like that. They were viewed
as sort of criminals and swine, people who were
sort of misfits and weirdos. 82nd Airborne, what
did they call it? AA was their symbol. It stood for
All-American, and I think we changed that into
something like animals and assholes. But the
worst thing that could happen would be to bomb out
of Special Forces training and end up going to the
82nd airport. I mean, that was like the worst
possible thing that you could imagine. What did
your training in Special Forces involve? What did
they teach you? Well, the training I went through,
it was called Tactics and Techniques, Phase I and
Phase II. God, it's hard to remember. Phase I,
Phase I we learned
I think phase one involved learning our job
specialty that we were going to have within
Special Forces. Years was? I was a radio operator
called O5B. My MOS in the Army was O5B4S. When we
first got there, we went through some processing
where we had pictures taken from passports and all
kinds of crazy stuff. And then you just kind of went
through a building and you, they didn't really
tell you one way or the other, you know, what the
difference, you knew that you could be, if you were
E3 or E2 to E4, which is private to like a corporal,
the options open to you were radio operator,
engineer, and medic. And if you were like E5 and
above, I think the options were all of those. Those
three plus, you could get into weapons,
demolition, what they called operations and
intelligence, which was more or less spying. And I
guess that was about it. So anyway, first part had
to do with training in the job. I can't remember
whether, though, in the first part there were some
of the infantry tactics and guerrilla tactics.
Oh, yeah, yeah, that's right. Part of it, the first
part, you went through your MOS training, which
for me involved learning everything about
radios, cutting antennas to frequency, learning
Mars code, learning radio procedure, learning
about all the different kinds of radios, to the
point where I could supposedly be inserted
anywhere in the universe and set up a radio and get
in touch with someone thousands of miles away if we
had to be resupplied or whatever. But the other
part had to do with a very important part of the
mission of Special Forces. Well, the overall
mission of Special Forces is to train and equip the
indigenous personnel in the art of guerrilla
warfare. In Vietnam, the mission was to train and
equip the indigenous personnel in the art of
counterinsurgency. But this idea of training is a
very important part of the mission of Special
Forces. So we had a big unit as part of our training
on teaching, where we learned about visual aids
and how to give a speech and how to teach and how to
test and all that sort of stuff. So as I recall,
phase one involved learning our job
specialization and also learning how to teach
maybe some other stuff. I can't recall. And then
that was tactics and techniques phase one. And
then tactics and techniques phase two involved
actual you know, learning about guerrilla
warfare, how to conduct both insurgent and
counterinsurgent, counterinsurgency
operations,
which involved, you know, setting up camps and,
you know, all your basic infantry kinds of
tactics, how to put together a mission, how to make
what they called poncho parachutes, how to build
landing zones, how to build drop zones so you could
be resupplied from the air. In fact, one part of
that training involved going out somewhere and
building. I think the engineers built a runway,
and then they had C-130s come and pick us up. And
then the engineers had also built a drop zone, and
then they dropped us in on the drop zone. And then
the last part of the Phase two is where you got
together in a team, a 12-man team. They put you in
what they called kind of a safe house situation,
where you're isolated from the world. You planned
a mission that you were going to go on, and then you
executed the mission. In our case, we got dropped
into Pisgah, North Carolina National Forest at
night in a soybean field, and we were picked up by
indigenous people that's farmers and stuff and
pick up trucks and they cover us over and drove us in
the mountains and we conducted more or less a
guerrilla campaign while at the same time being
pursued by counter-insurgents pretty good
training when you got out of uh your training what
what happened then i was assigned to vietnam no i
was assigned to the seventh special forces group
company a I was there on what they called, I can't
remember the actual name of it, but I was attached
to a special project at that time that I'm not at
liberty to discuss, even to this very day. Top
secret. Well, I don't know, whatever you want to
call it, but I was assigned to the special project
for approximately
seven months, and then after that I was...
assigned to the Special Forces in Vietnam.
When you got your orders to go overseas, what were
your feelings? Were you scared? Well, I saw guys
going all the time, you know, so I figured, well,
sort of, yeah. At this point, I was kind of, you
know, wary. I was thinking, oh, geez, you know,
this is it. what we called at that time the Live Fire
FTX. FTX stands for Field Training Exercise.
Whenever everybody got their orders to go to
Vietnam, they called it the Live Fire FTX. You were
on your way to
Vietnam. And there weren't a whole lot of guys at
that time either that had, younger guys that had
been to Vietnam and then come back and were
reassigned to a stateside unit. But So, they
didn't really have a lot of guys to talk to who had
been there. The older NCOs had got some of them, and
a lot of the older NCOs, as a matter of fact, went
over there and stayed. I mean, a lot of them had been
over there since the late 50s, you know. So, there
wasn't a pool of guys, really, you know, that you
could talk to and find out a whole lot about it from.
So, yeah, I was worried, but I wasn't scared. I was
just worried. you know, concerned, but I felt
equipped. You know, I felt like I was really
well-trained. Did you feel like one of the best and
the brightest? Oh, yeah. I felt like I had had the
best possible training, at least in the Army, you
know, that you could get. And the kind of mission,
you know, that I perceived of myself performing in
Vietnam was precisely, you know, what I wanted to
do. When
you first got to Vietnam, What did you see? Let's
see.
I saw a Tan Sanute Air Force base. No, no, not Tan
Sanute. Cameron Bay. Got off the plane and looked
around. It looked like a giant prison camp. There
was barbed wire all over the place. There was
nobody wearing anything but military uniforms.
They rushed us off the plane, jumped onto a bus,
took us somewhere, immediately separated the
Special Forces guys out, put everybody else in a
big lump. And then they had,
for the officers, for the Special Forces
officers, they had helicopters, came and picked
them up and took them off to Natrang. And then the
enlisted guys, they gave us all M-16s, put us on
trucks, and drove us to Natrang from Cam Ranh Bay.
Where is that train? I guess it's about 125 miles
north of Cam Ranh Bay.
That was strange. I mean, we rode down these roads
at, you know, 60 miles an hour, and the Montagnards
were driving the trucks, these wild ass, you know,
little people from the mountains. And we just went
roar assing through all these little villages.
locked and loaded. I'll never forget when I
finally got to the train, my ass hurt so bad. I
couldn't sit down. I couldn't sit down for a week.
But that was my initial experience, right? You
know, here's a gun, go to the train. You
set up as a radio operator there, right? You were in
charge of more or less the communications
organization period. What they call first
echelon maintenance and, you know, teaching the
people that we worked with, you know, appropriate
radio procedure and that sort of stuff. Did you
have a lot of Vietnamese help with your
operations? Not really, no. Vietnamese
counterparts. See, at that time, there was some
controversy. They had the
Mike Force, which was what I was in. We had
Montagnard mercenaries, more or less. These guys
were paid. They weren't a part of the, we were
attached to the Vietnamese Army. We weren't a part
of the United States Army when we were there. So all
our equipment came through the Vietnamese Army.
But we were supposed to have what they call
Vietnamese counterparts. And at this time, there
was sort of like an internal rebellion among the
Montagnards, and they all threatened to quit and
go back to Bamituot, where most of them came from,
or at least the ones that we had. And there had been
some rebellions at some of the egg camps. they had
one of the camps they had held, you know, taking the
Vietnamese and strung them up from the, you know,
the flag poles, and it held the Americans not
really hostage. But anyway, the Moniards hated
all Vietnamese. So at the time when I got there,
they had sort of shuffled the Vietnamese off to
Buffalo for a while, you know, until things cooled
down. But the Moniards just created a ruckus. We
were in bad shape for a while because half of them
just said, screw you, you know, and took their
portable radios and headed back to the mountains.
Back to the mountains. Yeah. You had problems with
the mountain yards, and from what we've been
studying in history, it seems like a lot of times
U.S. troops didn't know exactly who to fight, but
with the Viet Cong in the south and the Viet Minh in
the north. Did you ever get that feeling of who are
we here against? Well, only with reference to the
Vietnamese, you know. The Montagnards were
pretty, they, like I said, they hated all
Vietnamese, and they were perfect, you know,
perfect allies, and the Vietnamese hated the
Cambodians, you know, so, so we had Special Forces
basically had Cambodian strike force teams,
Cambodian mercenaries and Montagnard
mercenaries, the idea being that these guys hated
Vietnamese, and they didn't give a damn whether
they were Viet Cong, North Vietnamese, South
Vietnamese, or anything. They hated Vietnamese.
So,
with reference to the people that we worked most
closely with, nah, not really. But see, there was,
it was just pretty strange. I mean, yeah, I mean,
when you go into a village or ride by people or
whatever, you never know what the hell their
proclivities were. So, you know, it kind of, you
never know. That's it. Bottom line. Nobody.
Nobody Vietnamese. But the Montagnards are
pretty trustworthy little guys, I think. And I
think they're probably still fighting to this
very day. I wouldn't doubt it one bit. People tend
to fight a long time if they want something that
bad. On a geographic level, what was Vietnam like?
I've heard it was all jungle, mountainous. See, I
spent most of my time out in the terrain. And
we traveled around a lot as part of what we had to do.
But where I was, it was a lot like Southern
California. I mean, what blew me away, well, I came
back from Vietnam one time on an emergency leave to
escort a body back, and I landed. I'd never been to
California before. I think it was Travis Air Force
Base in California that we landed at. I'm not sure,
though. But I got off the plane. I looked around. I
said, God damn. This looks exactly like where I am.
This is all flying and leaving from this place.
Right. So we were on the beach. I mean, it was
beautiful. Sandy beaches. You looked out from
where we were. Our little detachment was right on
the edge of what they called the SFOP, which is the
Special Forces Operational Base. It's like the
main home base for Special Forces. And we were out
on one edge. And you could look out. There's a big
open field and a beautiful mountain, just like you
see in California, where if you're on the coast and
you see the ocean, and you look over your shoulder,
there's the mountains. You couldn't see the ocean
exactly from where we were, but it was a lot like
California, you know. That's interesting. Yeah.
Had a rainy season like you have in California.
What, aside from military activities, went on in
Vietnam? For me, basically drinking and whoring,
I guess you'd say. I mean, extracurricular
activities. But everybody had their own quirks,
you know. I mean, there were religious guys right
alongside of the, you know, the profane,
sinful-type guys. Whenever we had spare time, we
would either go into the trang itself, or if we were
on a long stand-down, I'd go travel, see my
buddies, you know, at other camps, especially up
at Pleiku, where I had a really, really close
friend. In the movies, you see all this drug abuse
going on in the military in Vietnam, the troops
walking through the swamp smoking a joint. I don't
put much stock in that, but mainly because it's
Hollywood. But was drug abuse, right in the middle
of the 60s, drugs were starting to be the end thing.
Was drug abuse very prevalent in the military in
Vietnam? From my experience, toward the end of my
stay there, the guys that started coming in from
the States were using marijuana, you know, like
into marijuana, you know. And on a couple of
occasions, I got hooked up with some real loony
bins guys. And I remember one time going to an opium
den. I didn't smoke any opium. I was just shocked. I
mean, here I was, you know, roasting 12 Special
Forces, but I never thought that there was such a
thing in the world as these places where people
laid on wooden beds and huffed on opium. I
remember, too, when I was there, I went in and
looked around and said, this is fucking crazy. I
don't have anything to do with this. So I sat out in
the waiting room with the woman that was running
the place. And while I was there, what amounted to
the Vietnamese pusher man came around And I'll
never forget, man, he had this big black
briefcase, right? And he dumped it out on the
floor, and it was just all, like, already rolled
marijuana cigarettes. And he and this woman
haggled over these things for about 20 minutes
while I was sitting there drinking, you know, and
watching them. It was weird. And then when this one
guy, these guys that I was with, whose names I'll
never remember, uh, When they went back out onto
the street, man, everybody that saw them, all the
Vietnamese that saw them were going, you know,
they could tell, look at these guys, and they were
just bongo. But most of the guys that I knew, there
was kind of like a, see, Special Forces, you know,
it wasn't really, I mean, everybody in Special
Forces wasn't Special Forces trained, and there
were all sorts of what you would call sort of
support personnel who were, who didn't have the
same ideals, you know, and ambitions of the guys
that had actually gone through the training. And
you'd meet some of these guys in the train, you
know, who were in headquarters company, and these
guys were the ones that were sort of like, you know,
not up to standards, I guess you might say, or up to
speed. There were a lot of guys wearing berets over
there that didn't even have, had never been to
airborne school or anything. were assigned to
special forces, you know, cooks, you name it. So
that's one thing a lot of people don't realize when
they look, you know, think about special forces.
There were guys over there that were involved in
intelligence work and things. I never realized
that there were so many people that weren't
trained in special forces. Oh, yeah. Yeah, and at
the time I was there, they were hurting for people,
so they would take guys from, you know, like the
101st Airborne See, once you got there, and if you
had some combat experience, you could volunteer
to go into Special Forces. So we had a lot of guys
that would come in. Not a lot, but a few, who had been
in the 101st, and maybe had decided to stay in
Vietnam for an extra year. And part of the
condition of the re-enlistment was to get into
Special Forces. Because actually, Special
Forces duty was pretty good stuff. At least it was
for me.
this all this drug questions i asked or leading to
one point
to me the other day or a couple of months ago she said
that she thought that one of the reasons for our i
guess you could say failure to win the war in
vietnam was because a lot of people were coming out
of high school and not having the opportunity to go
to college like yourself and that a lot of them were
not the caliber of men we would want serving our
country. Would you buy that argument at all? Well,
I don't know. Most of the guys that I spent any time
with were excellent human beings, some of the best
people that I have or ever will.